# 1° Background

This repository contains the scripts, the workflow and the explanations to reproduce the data obtained from a research project about mangrove rivulus (Kryptolebias marmoratus) wild populations. This project is a part of the PhD thesis of Valentine Chapelle which aims to study the epigenetic diversity of DNA methylation in wild populations of this self-fertilizing fish species. Four populations have been sampled in Emerson Point Preserve (EPP - 42 fish) and Long Key (LK - 30 fish) in Florida ; in Long Caye (LC - 28 fish) and Twin Caye (TC - 40 fish) in Belize, in May and July 2019. These four populations are characterized by a gradient of hermaphrodites/males ratio (EPP > LK > LC > TC) and thus a gradient of genetic diversity. The main scientific question is to know whether wild populations with very low genetic diversity can compensate with a higher epigenetic diversity to maintain a variation of phenotypes. The phenotypes have been analyzed at the behavioral level by measuring boldness and exploratory personality traits during the days following sampling. Brain, liver and gonads have then been removed for DNA methylation analysis using Reduced Representation Bisulfite Sequencing (RRBS). 

Directly after dissection, organs were stored in RNA Later Stabilization Solution (Invitrogen), brought back in Belgium and kept at -80°C until DNA extraction. DNA of the organs from the 140 individuals were extracted using Nucleospin Tissue XS kit (Macherey-Nagel). Libraries were prepared from 100 ng of purified DNA using Premimum RRBS kit (Diagenode) and purified twice using Agencourt AMPure XP beds (Beckman Coulter). Libraries were sequenced on two NextSeq550 High Output flow cells (Illumina) as single-end 100 bp reads with a minimum sequencing depth of 10 millions reads per sample. Quality was assessed using FastQC (Babraham Bioinformatics) ; trimming was performed using TrimGalore (Babraham Bioinformatics) ; genome alignment and methylation calling was performed using Bismark (Babraham Bioinformatics). We used the reference genome of Kryptolebias marmoratus assemble version 2 (RefSeq assembly accession: GCF_001649575.2). The Bioconductor R package methylKit was used to identify differentially methylated regions (DMRs) and CpGs (DMCs). Visualization and annotation was processed into SeqMonk (Babraham Bioinformatics). Functional enrichment was performed using the R package gprofiler2. 
